Hello, good afternoon Dilwyn. This is Jill Jones from Minera talking to Dilwyn Roberts.
So, hello Dilwyn, thank you very much for deciding to talk to us this afternoon.
Now, would you like to start off by saying your name and your date of birth
and telling us a little bit about your school days, early life?
Yes, I will thank you Jill. I can mention your name, yes?
Yes.
I was born on the 29th of the 3rd 1930. I started school when I was five years old
in the Infants Junior School, Pennegallie Road.
I was in the Infants School for over two years until I became seven.
Then I was taken to Pennegallie Junior School which was only ten yards across the road from the Infants School.
I was in the Junior School until the age of eleven.
Then I was transferred to Pennegallie Road Secondary School, Cudpoith.
Yes.
I was there until I was fourteen. Unfortunately, I didn't have any education.
Otherwise, I would have gone to Wrexham Grammar School, but unfortunately I didn't qualify.
Then I had to seek work.
Yes.
Then, in 1944, I had to leave school at fourteen. We all had to.
I actually had an education which I did not, like you just mentioned.
Then, a little friend of mine who lived a hundred yards away, he worked in the Monero line works.
His name was Mr. Moss Edwards and we used to call him Uncle Moss.
Yes.
He said, is that any work, Dilwyn? I said, no, Uncle.
Looking for work, he said, I'll have a word with my boss.
Then he called to see me one day, Dilwyn. Can you start work on Monday?
I started work in the Monero line works.
So, that sounds good and straightforward. So, what sort of work were you doing in the line works, Dilwyn?
Now, in the Monero line works, there were three railway lines.
One going up to the number one kiln, one going up to the number two kiln, one going up to the crusher.
Yes, I remember.
Now, on the left, in the bottom, was the manager's office and the manager was called Mr. Sutton, his wife, and he had a young daughter.
Yes.
Next to the manager's office was the clerk's office and there was a general call by the name of Mr. John Roberts and his assistant called Ivor Owen Roberts who lived in Monero.
So, Dilwyn was given a job in the office.
I worked in the office for three weeks and I said to the manager, I'm very sorry, Mr. Sutton, I'm not enjoying this work.
Can you give me another job in the quarry, whatever, ever?
No problem, Dilwyn. He said, I'll give you a job in the seater room with a lovely gentleman called little Sam Bellis.
Oh, yes.
And Sam Bellis lived in Gwynedd. I think Sam lived, he was ninety odd.
I think that's right.
He was not small, and I was, what a lovely gentleman.
And the seat room, it was in the seat room, they called it the seat room.
We repaired the seats for when the line was burnt in the number one and number two kilns, the labors had to fill the railway wagons with this burnt line.
Then in case the weather came wet, icy or snowed, we had to cover that line with these sheets, otherwise all the line would dissolve into nothing.
So, I was in the seat room, Wyle was in the seat room, and the seat was next to the clerk's office, all them were linked together.
Yeah.
Then next to the seat room, and I'll give you the history, Mr. Hallam was the foreman, and his cottage was next door to the seat room.
They were all linked together.
Manager's office, the clerk's office, seat room, and the foreman's, Mr. Hallam.
And he came from, he was a foreman in the quarry in Buxton, in Gavisham.
Yes.
Then, while I was working in the seat room, all the spare time I had, I had to walk to the quarry back, I can't remember the name of the main road to the Menelis, what was it called?
Mice of Funan.
Mice of Funan Road.
I had to walk a quarter mile every day, six times a day, from the quarry to the spring.
Yes.
In Mice of Funan, to get water for the men, there was no taps there, so that they could have a drink.
And that was my job.
And have you seen the Dutch people in Holland?
Yes.
They had an instrument over their shoulders to carry a bucket on each of them.
And I had one of them.
That was my job for about 18 months.
Then, I was there, I done my apprenticeship in the seat room.
Then, they sent me to the quarry.
I was only a little, five foot nothing, and all the big snappy men, farmers, sons.
Then, I worked on the number one break, on the big drum, with Dye Evans, who was from Gwinnley.
Yes, yes.
And he also had a young son called Stan.
That's right.
But I, unfalterly, you've got to take my memory, I can't hold it in my head, so far, 76 years ago, I can't remember anything.
But poor Stan, I think he had anemia, and I think Stan passed away very young, in his life.
Yes, he did.
Yeah, I can recommend that, a lovely young chap, Stan.
Yes.
Then, I was on the break with Dye.
Then, we'd supply three wagons to go down the break, and at the bottom of the break, there'd be a gentleman called Trevor Jones from Gwinnley.
Yes.
He'd have his big stallion, waiting for the three wagons.
The three full wagons would go down the break, and they also would supply us in the quarry with four empty wagons.
Yes.
That was my job, until I became 18 years old.
Then, I was called to the National Service, and the government put Dillwyn in the Royal Air Force.
Oh, that's great.
For two years.
Yes.
Then, when I finished in the Air Force, when I was 20, I came back to the quarry for two years.
And back, I went with Dye as a breaksman.
Yes.
Dye's assistant.
Then, I had to do alternative jobs.
I was sent, only once I ever went, to number two kill.
Mm-hmm.
Then, Mr. Hallam finished as a poor man.
Yes.
Then, a lovely gentleman called Mr. Beech.
He became a, and he also came from Buxton.
Then, he said, Dillwyn, I would like you to go to number two kill.
Then, we all had to wear clogs.
Yes.
We had to take clogs with us to work, as well as our walking boots, in case we were sent to the kill.
Because, if you went to the kill for one day, you would have no boots to go home in.
Fair enough.
The heat was that tremendous, it would burn your soles of your shoe.
Yes.
So, we had to wear clogs, and they were covered in iron underneath.
All the sole was covered in iron, and the heel.
So, that they wouldn't burn.
Right.
Then, I only worked there for two days, but I loved it.
But, every day I went home, I had to jump in the bath.
My feet was that sore, with the temperature.
My mam used to put me in the bath, and she used to put some radux in the bath, so that I could get my feet.
Well, I said, oh mam, I don't like this yoke.
Well, don't do it then.
No, I said, I won't refuse.
Mm-hmm.
Well, luckily, I only done two days there.
Yeah.
Then, do you want any more information about the quarry?
Yes, carry on.
Now, there were, there was, oh, by the way, when I was fourteen and a half, my father was in the war for five years.
He was in India, fighting the Japanese.
Oh my goodness.
Yes, yes.
When he come home, till when he said, I'm going to have six weeks off, spend all my immigration money from the army, the Royal Tilly.
Mm-hmm.
And, we used to go to cinema in Kapoor, Parrish Hall in Kapoor, my mam would take us there.
And, I was the oldest.
I was nine.
Mm-hmm.
I had a brother and a sister.
And, and we saw these ships going on all the pathing hills.
Dill, your dad might be on that boat.
We don't know where he's going, but he might be on it.
And, he finished off Columbus Ceylon.
Mm-hmm.
Then, he come home.
He said, can you get me a job, Dill, in the limelight?
Yes, dad, I said.
Alas, Mr. Beats.
So, I went.
Mr. Beats, he was in the time clock, Mr. Beats, always watch everybody come in.
Yes.
So, if you give us our job for the day.
We signed on with the clock.
Mm-hmm.
Dill went, do this, do that, and he had to go.
Like, I loved every job there besides the number two kill.
I didn't like that job.
Mm-hmm.
Two out.
I mean, I didn't like heat.
I said, oh, Mr. Beats, can I sit?
Yes, he said, take him with them while everybody's coming in first.
He went and leveled it here.
Come in the office, so everybody knows.
My father told him, oh, lovely Dill.
And, he said, oh, Mr. Beats, oh, he's okay.
He gets a little bit malaria, I said, but he's okay.
He gets treatment for it.
We've been in India.
Still, I'm sorry, Mr. Dill, when he said it.
And my dad's standing there.
I got my dad a job there.
Yes.
So, and my dad is there.
That's good news.
Still, them, and I come from the Air Force.
Mm-hmm.
Now, there was ten smallish wagons on the Cloddy face.
And there was two men, partners to each other.
Mm-hmm.
But I can name them all, but it's either going to be at last Christmas.
But my father was partnered with a lovely chap, Uncle Injavis, from Middle Road, Matt.
Uncle Injavis.
And his son's grandson is still alive now, but not as personally like my father.
And there was ten pairs of them, yeah.
And that's the job I was given, too.
Supplying these ten men with a wagon to fill them with limestone.
And a couple of times, I went on the little wading machine on the Cloddy.
Yes.
And they had a little engine there.
And Alf Wild was responsible for keeping that engine in good form.
Also the big engine, Bob the Engine.
Yes.
Bob, and I think Bob was one good in it.
Mm-hmm.
I think so, Bob.
And Bob, my big best friend, also Daniel's, from Nants Square, Matt, good boy.
He was the skunter on the train.
Yes.
For the number one kill and number two kill.
And poor Daniel, he lost his sight when he was 34 years old.
Oh my goodness.
Yeah, TB.
Yes.
Best friend of mine, Daniel.
And so it's that group of people.
Then the oldest fella next to me would be Albert Peters.
Yes, I remember Albert.
From Buchwind or Gwinnett.
Yes.
Is he still alive?
I don't think so.
Was his wife called Cain when?
I don't know.
You don't know?
That's all I know.
He was in the same class as me in school, the second in school, the good boy.
Yes.
And he, Ned a go, he was from Middle Road, Nants.
He was the blacksmith.
Ned a go, Ned a go, his name was, go is a blacksmith.
Yes.
And Albert was his apprenticeship, apprentice.
And Ned a go was in charge if he had a runaway on the break.
Yes.
Then, let's get down now, then a job I had was with Trevor and Joss.
With the two stallions.
Yes.
Trevor wasn't well, Joss wasn't well.
Billman, can you do the horses?
Yeah, I'll have a go Mr. Beech.
I done okay.
Then I used to, Trevor used to, like he was Trevor, he used to supply number one kill
with a limestone.
Yes.
Three wagons at a time.
Then the next three wagons, he'd take them over to number two break, to the small break
and the small drum, supplying number one kill.
And Joss would be in charge of that drum and the wagons and the horse.
Yes.
Joss.
Then on a Saturday morning, Trevor said to me, we'd like extra work on Saturday morning,
same about every six weeks.
Yes, Trevor, a bit extra work for you lad, thank you.
We had to fill a big railway wagon with horse manure.
Right.
And he said, where's the manure going, Trevor?
He said, just outside, I think it is in Mach Wheel somewhere, a big mushroom farm to make
mushrooms.
Yes, yes, that sounds right.
Horse manure heats up quickly.
Yes.
And you've got to have heat for mushrooms.
Then when we had the horses, on a Monday morning, believe me, we, Trevor, we'd go down, Joss
sometimes, past the Mr. Beattie's house, Sheet Room, Clark and Mr. Sutton's.
On the left was a big steep bank with all the wretches, the dust, lime dust.
Yes.
And I used to work, oh, I didn't like that job by then.
No, it didn't this job.
Anyway, I did it.
Then, lower down, 100 yards down the road, there was two fields and the horses were grazed
there.
Ah, right, I know.
And you, do you know what, do you know what, Jill?
We had to cook some, they were wild.
Mm-hmm.
Being let free, you see.
Yes.
We had to cook some with hay and horse nests.
Mm-hmm.
Well, what a job.
But they got used to us and we need being new, now and again.
They weren't used to me, you see.
Horses, like, seen as birds, they go for colour.
Mm-hmm.
And if you didn't like your jacket or something, you'd have a job to train them.
Yeah.
I found that out to Trevor's telling me all about it.
He said to me one day, have they got a different colour pullover, Jill?
And I said, yeah, why?
This horse doesn't like it pullover.
No?
And same as my birds, I keep birds.
They don't like colour.
No.
Anyway, so that was that part of it.
Then across, right opposite the office and all that, that block, there was a big wane
room where Bob the Engine, he'd bring all the wagons down with a lineman.
He'd have them all weighed.
Then the big railway wagon from, the big train from Wrexham, number one train, come
and pick them up and take them to Brombeau Steel to make steel with it, with a line.
Yes.
Yeah.
Then they'd also take limestone as well.
Then in Brombeau they had a big crusher and they crushed it into dust for the farmers
to put on the farms.
Right.
And Mr. Beats said to me one day, he said, you're going to have a walk in the morning.
We gave you an accent for it.
Why, Mr. Beats?
You'll have to walk to Brombeau for a couple of weeks every morning.
Why, I said, you're going on the crusher and to load the bags with dust, he said, for the
farmers.
I was there for two or three weeks.
I didn't like the job but I did it.
Very, very dusty.
I had to wear a mask and glasses, you know.
Yes.
So I did that job.
Yes, I would hope so.
Yes.
And anyway, I'm going back to number one kiln.
I loved landscape.
I was a landscaper for five years.
Mm-hmm.
From when I was 34 years old to when I was 39.
And that's how we became landscaper.
And I'd walk, we only had half an hour for dinner.
I'd have a sandwich in the inn and there was lovely woodlands in the Minerva line, Maxine.
Yes.
I don't know whether the habitat had been taken away or not, I don't know.
No, that's all still there.
The number one kiln, right at the end of the number one kiln, where the line completed.
Yes.
You couldn't go any further.
The line completed.
Then there was a break supplying the wagons to come down.
Yes.
But that railway line finished there.
That's the end of it.
The big buffers stopped the wagons going any further.
Then on the left there, there was a lovely woodland.
Shrubs away, not big, big trees.
I used to suddenly get through them.
I knew top of all these flowers, Jill.
Yes.
All types.
What's the main one, did you say, you get?
The one they all are interested in is the orchids.
Now, I used to see them orchids.
Yes.
Then, in them days.
76.
I used to love it.
And I used to take some home.
Yes.
For me mother.
That's it.
Yes.
The smell on them.
Oh, that's it.
And primroses.
Yes.
All sorts.
Wild flower vegetation.
So, hopefully that vegetation is still there.
It is.
Yeah.
It is, because they're part of my list.
That's it.
Because I check.
And I, oh, and then there was a Percy Ellis working on the big whey machine.
Percy.
Yes.
When he was working in the Sheets Room, and he married me auntie's sister from New Brighton.
Mm-hmm.
Percy did.
So, what?
He had married her then.
He did.
I found out he'd married.
My auntie Phyllis' sister from New Brighton.
And I used to call her when he had a bit of dinner in the Sheets Room.
Mm-hmm.
I'd go there and I'd chat to Percy.
Yeah.
We'd have a chat, yeah.
And Sam Bellis used to love me when I started working there.
I'd get a pencil and a paper.
Not bad.
I'd take it with me.
I used to love drawing.
Right.
Yes.
What you doing, Dill, when you said, I'm drawing, Sam.
What you drawing?
I said Donald Duck.
Never.
Sam was looking.
D'oh, Dillwyn, that's lovely.
Do you know what he said?
My son, I don't know what he said, but Jean-Ruth, I'm not sure his son's name, he used to work
on the face of firemen on the face of the quarry, blowing the quarry up with dynamites.
Yes.
And he lived in Gwinnivu.
I don't know if he was married or not.
Very, very tall.
Sam was little.
His son was very, very tall.
He was a very, very tall man.
I used to be a copy drawer.
I could never draw a human being.
Never.
But his son, he was absolutely marvelous.
Absolutely marvelous, he was.
And he took mine home to show his son.
Yeah.
And I used to, going away from the limax now really, I used to join Chums League in their
ex-sum leader.
Yes.
There only used to be one ex-sum leader then.
There was three every Thursday.
Yes.
There were three.
A big, big, massive paper.
Not like the paper you get now.
Massive.
You'd have three every Thursday.
And I joined the Chums League.
I went every week nearly.
And I'd go to Montgomery.
Cone Montgomery and South Africa, where he beat Rommel and his men.
General Montgomery.
You've heard of General Montgomery during the war.
Yes, I know General Montgomery.
And an elephant.
Yes?
And a lion's face on his head.
his face and his head, Mickey Mouse, Donald Duck all them. My mother had a letter, I'd
been working in the Linux then, and she said, I do, and he said, I've had a letter from
the editor, the editor of Leading. I said, yeah. He said, we're going there Saturday
morning, it's in Queen Street, anything, remember? I'll go on the road, I can't remember
where, because my memory's not as good. Look what he says, I read it, he says, please do
not trace your drawings. Right, my mother said, to the temper, I'm going to get a notepad
and a pen, a pencil, my mother, I want one, a pen. Went down there, she knocked on the
door, could I speak to the editor, please? We went upstairs, yes, introduced ourselves,
right, what's this letter you sent me? But my son says, my son's never traced his life,
well, yes, Mr. Roberts, he couldn't draw that good. Right, he said, my son was brought a
photo of Donald Duck here, he's going to draw it for you, and I drew it for him. Mr. Roberts,
he said, apology, and following week, following Thursday, it was in the, what do you call it,
and I got an award for it, I had a book for it, an apology, and you know what they call it,
then a couple of weeks after, my photo of a lion was there, right, and what do you call it,
a girl's name underneath, I drawn it. Down, my mother went to me again,
yeah, oh, Mrs. Roberts, we are sorry, it's not my fault, he said, it's these people who work for us,
and an apology was made, and an erection needed, and ma'am, I'm not going to bother John again,
and send that episode any, that was linked to the alignment, because I used to draw for Sam
Billis, yes, yes, and I don't know where else he want me to go now, well, shall we stop for a minute,
and yes, now, can I ask you a question now, yes, I hope I am going to, you tell me if I'm making any
errors, or I don't need that said, please tell me, I do go on, but I got information in my head,
and it's coming out, yes, can I just stop you for a minute, if you want to stop me Carol,
or Jill, stop me, I don't know, I'm concerned, I've got this back now, when I pressed it,
there was a light saying it was recording, and I think it's still recording now,
but I'm worried in case it hasn't captured, oh yeah, everything, everything, so I'm going,
I think the best thing to do is to try and check, yes, because,
what it did, it lights up, and it says it's recording, and then it displays some numbers
to say it's recording, and then it goes off, the writing goes off, so you're not quite sure
whether it's still capturing, or whether it's gone off, but if it's recording me talking now,
we should be okay, because it's, it will have recorded you too, so what I'm going to do now,
is I'm going to see if we can go back, so it says to play back, yes, so do I,
because a lot of the men you mentioned, I knew, I knew them as savers, when I first moved into,
any names you want to know? Not, now one thing's possible, Sam yeah, um,
Dye Evans, Dye, and Stan Evans I knew, yeah, did he pass away at the young stand? He did,
I remember my, my husband being, he died in his mid-30s, yeah, that's it, now he had another
older brother,